##  Security Controls and Mitigations

Where relevant, recommendations are presented with an applicable security control from the NIST 800-53 standard. Each should be evaluated with the idea of hours of infiltration in mind. (Note that applications of these techniques require that logs and alerts have timestamps and that time across all systems be in sync. See AU-8: Time Stamps.)

1. Evaluate your hours of operation and perform threat modeling. When are you most vulnerable to attack? What can you do to train your staff to be prepared? [NIST SP 800-154: Guide to Data-Centric System Threat Modeling][6](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/cyberjutsu/9781098128920/b01.xhtml#endnote-50)
2. Implement time-based privilege controls on accounts based on users’ business and operational needs. For example, restrict certain users’ ability to send or receive work email after 7:00 PM. [AC-2: Account Management | (6) Dynamic Privilege Management]
3. Restrict the ability to log into or use specific accounts during certain hours. For example, when there is an attempt to perform unauthorized actions on an inactive account between 9:00 PM and 11:00 PM, alert the user immediately to verify their identity. If they are unresponsive or their authentication fails, alert the SOC. [AC-2: Account Management | (11) Usage Conditions]
4. Leverage heuristic analysis systems to detect abnormal system access or usage patterns during set times. Users should voluntarily document and provide insight into their “typical usage” patterns to help model their expected behavior during their workday. [AC-2: Account Management | (12) Account monitoring for A-typical Usage]
5. Require system owners and users to document when systems are expected to be in use and when they could be powered off. [AC-3: Access Enforcement | (5) Security Relevant Information]
6. Shrink the time frame during which adversaries can operate. Define a strategic enterprise policy whereby sensitive or proprietary information should be accessed only during set times—for instance, between 11:00 AM and 3:00 PM on weekdays. [AC-17: Remote Access | (9) Disconnect/Disable Access]
7. Inform the account holder when they have successfully or unsuccessfully logged in, including the time and date of last login. Tracking this information helps a user alert the SOC if their account has been compromised and tell the SOC when the unauthorized access occurred. [AC-9: Previous Login (Access) Notification | (4) Additional Logon Information]
8. After establishing times of operation, configure user devices and systems to automatically lock at a specified time, terminating all sessions. [AC-11: Session Lock]
9. Document a policy that communicates the times and dates that changes to infrastructure and systems are allowed. This assists the SOC when evaluating network and configuration changes on an hour-by-hour basis. [AU-12: Audit Generation | (1) System Wide and Time Audit Correlation Trail; CM-5: Access Restrictions for Change]

## Debrief

In this chapter, you learned about the traditional Japanese time based on Chinese zodiac animals, Chinese astrology’s influence on divination, and how shinobi likely used these to seize opportunities to infiltrate or outmaneuver a target. You have considered how network activity may vary depending on the time of day and how you can reduce attack opportunity through time-based controls. You became familiar with the shinobi’s security standard. Specifically, you learned that a security guard was expected to notice the smallest incongruity in their scanning sector—anything that might indicate the presence of an adversary. In addition, you reviewed guidance on how to apply some of these concepts to your threat hunting, security operation processes, and anomaly detection systems.

In the next chapter, we will review an application of time confidentiality, keeping the time a secret from malware, which may allow defenders to exercise particular detection and defense options.